# Intro to Front-End Frameworks

If you just want to dive into the code, start [here.](#where-to-start)

What we did earlier was create a simple todo app in html/css 
and implement the basic functionality in Javascript. What we 
are going to do next is implement this exact same app in React. 

But before we do that, you might be asking yourself why do we 
need to do this app with a framework since the code we just 
wrote worked just fine? Or maybe what the heck is a framework?

## Why frameworks?

When you develop many applications from scratch, you'll find that 
within each project, you will repeat most of the same code. In 
addition to having a mostly similar boilerplate code, you will also 
notice that you will be designing multiple webpages that all look 
somewhat similar. 

Frameworks also are designed with a certain architecture in mind so 
not only are you saving time in not duplicating code, you're also 
saving time not designing the system.

There are several front-end frameworks (React, Vue, Angular, 
Svelte, jQuery, and so many more..) and each have their own pros 
and cons.

After writing, we should be able to see the immediate benefits 
of a front-end framework and how learning atleast one can 
be useful for rapid prototyping.

# Why React?

React is by far the most popular framework. Being popular in and of 
itself is a reason to use React. This means that there's tons of 
support, libraries, and tutorials out there.

1. Simplicity - it's easy to learn and understand.
2. Performant - the virtual dom structure often gives it better 
performance
3. Native - React Native allows you to develop native apps as well

These are just the reasons to pick React over other frameworks so 
benefits that frameworks share are not listed.

# Where to start?

## Start your own project and play with it
1. Install Node.js
2. Run these 3 lines in the terminal(Mac)/command prompt(Windows)

```bash
npx create-react-app my-app
cd my-app
npm start
```

3. Success! What should happen is your computer will compile the 
React source code into html/css/js and automatically open up a
tab in your main browser accessing your website.

What we just did was execute a script to automatically generate 
the boilerplate code for a React project. This means a lot of 
more production-ready tools have been set up for you so you can 
focus on coding the actual content of your site, rather than spend 
several hours learning the tools. (The main things they set up are 
Babel, Webpack, PostCSS and ESLint. They are each different tools 
that do something to make your code better. For example, Babel 
transpiles your code so that every browser supports your function 
and Webpack minifies your file size and compiles your code together. 
Either way, you don't need to worry about this for a long time.)

create-react-app will produce a similar structure as the one we have 
right now so keep that in mind when you want to start a new project 
from scratch.

## Info about this project

If this is your first time writing React, you will need to install 
[Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/).

*Note* This app was started using [create-react-app.](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html#create-react-app) 
and it's highly recommended for starting new React projects.

The file structure for our project looks mostly like this.

```bash
├── README.md
├── package-lock.json
├── package.json
├── public
│   ├── index.html
│   ├── manifest.json
│   └── robots.txt
└── src
    ├── App.test.js
    ├── components
    │   ├── App
    │   │   ├── App.css
    │   │   ├── App-commented.js
    │   │   └── App.js
    │   ├── Header
    │   │   ├── Header.css
    │   │   ├── Header-commented.js
    │   │   └── Header.js
    │   └── TodoList
    │       ├── TodoList.css
    │   │   ├── TodoList-commented.js
    │       └── TodoList.js
    ├── index.css
    ├── index.js
```

| File/Folder name  | Purpose |
|-------------------|---------|
| README.md         | That's this you're reading right now. Just a note to display on the Github repo |
| package.json      | This contains the 'metadata' for the source code of your project. It tells us which dependencies (libraries that we use) are included and other useful information about a certain project. The data is structure in a JSON format which makes it fairly readable and easy to understand. |
| package-lock.json | This is similar to the package.json but this file is automatically generated and has information on exactly which versions of each dependency I'm running. We won't be touching this at all so don't worry too much about it. |
| public            | The folder that holds all the files that will be hosted publicly. This will be our assets such as images and videos, favicons, html, and anything else that should be public. |
| src               | Here is where we do most of our coding. All of our source files will be here and then compiled into a final build folder that gets hosted online. |
| components        | There is no standard for how we organize our code. However, there is a common design pattern that we put all of our components inside a components folder. I like to then put every component as well as their stylesheets into another folder. You can see how I put the code for the Header component and all of it's relevant files into it's own folder. |
| index.js          | The starting point for our react project. This eventually calls App.js and App.js calls the other components. |
| index.css         | The corresponding css file for index.js |
| *-commented.js    | The files appended by '-commented.js' are the commented versions of the 
original component source code. Every line will be explained. You can start with index.js and 
follow the lines of comments to see how the code works |

*NOTE* This is a lot to take in so don't worry about understanding all 
of this at first. I'll go through a simplified version of how this code 
eventually translates into the html/css/js project we wrote earlier.

# How React works

Right off the bat, we see that there are a TON of more files than before. 
Our original app was just 3 files and now we have not just files but also 
folders of files.

How can React make development *simpler* if we have 10x as many files? Well, 
more files is usually way better. Eventually, your project will have thousands 
if not millions of lines of code and if it was all enclosed inside that one html 
file, debugging would be straight up impossible. The React architecture is based 
off of the concept of components. Essentially, every block that has it's own 
logic has all of it's corresponding code enclosed within that component's folder.

If you're thinking that this modular design may seem very similar to Object 
Oriented Programming (OOP), you're on the right track. In fact, before React 16.8, 
components in React were written as objects and classes but now, we use hooks but 
the concept is still the same.

The idea of React is that every component has their own "state" and when the
"state" changes, React will *react* to these changes and update the interface. 

For example, if we were to create a simple clock app, we would likely have 
a TimeDisplay component and it's state would be the current time. Whenever a 
second passes, the state should change to reflect the new time. When the state 
changes, React will *react* and update the UI with the new state automatically. 

## React with our todo app

If we were to translate this to our todo list app, we would most likely separate 
our app into 2 main components. 

*Note* Obviously, in a bigger app, a single webpage can have 
tens to hundreds of components and having a separate file for every component 
allows us to isolate all the code in one place to make debugging easier.

Our app will essentially have a Header component - keeps track of the date and 
displays it at the top, and a TodoList component - keeps track of the todo 
content.

We can, however break this down into an even smaller level. The content and 
logic of each todo item has nothing to do with another. That allows us to 
create another component called TodoItem and our TodoList will generate an 
'array' of TodoItems. 

## State

Now, the question is, what state do these components have? Similar to the 
clock example, our ```Header``` component will have a state containing the 
current date and the ```TodoList``` will have a state containing an array 
of every single item. Using its own state, the ```TodoList``` will then 
generate an array of ```TodoItem```'s that display the content but will 
each have their own little state called *complete* which holds a boolean 
value for whether or not that ```TodoItem``` has been completed. 

Notice how we now have no data being held at the global level. Every piece 
of data is contained within the component that actually uses that logic. 
This allows for a level of modularity and abstraction in our program that 
the basic html/css/js wouldn't allow for. 

React also does something out of the box for us. Remember how I said React 
just *reacts* to things?

Well, this takes care of some overhead. In our original html/css/js version, 
we had to write a ```display()``` function that would update every html 
element that we needed the content to change. In React, we don't need to do 
that since we just mutate the state and the html will automatically change 
without us needing to do anything.


## How the actual HTML code gets generated

The simplified version that helps to visualize how your code works is that 
each component is a function with a return statement. The return returns 
some type of HTML-looking code. This is actually a different language called 
JSX but you can think of it as HTML with Javascript functionality. 

*Note* This isn't how it *actually* works but you can visualize it like this.

Our index.js 'renders' our program by rendering our ```<App />``` component 
and injects the returned value into the div identified by "root" on line 7:
```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<App />, document.getElementById('root'));
```

But the question is, what gets rendered by App??

Well, if we look into the return statement for App, we see this:
```JSX
return (
    <div className="app">
        <Header />
        <TodoList />
    </div>
);
```

So our App actually returns a div with 2 children inside it: 
- our Header component
- our TodoList component

The next question is, well, we know what a div is, but what is a
Header and TodoList component? If we look at the import statements 
in the first couple lines of the file:

```javascript
import TodoList from '../TodoList/TodoList';
import Header from '../Header/Header';
import './App.css';
```
 
We can see that we import the ```TodoList``` component from the path
```../TodoList/TodoList``` and we can go there to look at the code 
that gets returned from there and so on and so forth.

# Conclusion

This summarizes how React works on the surface. To look at how to 
read and write React syntax and code, check out the individual 
component files and look for the ones with '-commented' as they 
have comments describing every line.